Hello and welcome back to the course on databases.
Today we're finally going to perform our very first join in practice in postgresql.
Very exciting story ahead.
Let's get straight to it.
So here we've got the tables already uploaded to our database and today we're going to work with the
two tables at the top.
We're going to work with the owners and the pets tables.
So let's quickly start to have a look at this table so we're going to create a query here and we're
going to just select all of the rows.
So I'll just press caps select star from our pets and then we'll do the same for select star from owners.
So let's run the top one first.
And here you can see 100 rows in total.
And here we've got pet I.D. which is the primary key for this table.
It's an identifier for each row for each pet.
Each pet has their own row in this table.
The name of the pet the type that whether it's a dog cat or a parrot the gender the age and the owner
ID the owner ID is a foreign key here.
This is the column basically what that means is that this is the column that we're going to use to connect
this information to the owners table because right now from here we cannot tell who is here got cuddles
a dog who's 13 years old but we don't know who this dog's owner is.
Who do we go to if we need to return the dog or if we need to call up about something some routine inspection
that the dog needs or some vaccination.
So who do we call.
Brioni have this owner ID field and that's the only way to find out who the owner is.
So for 3 7 8 and what we do is we go to the owners table here and we look for 4 3 7 8.
Have a look if we can find that manually of course much easier if we do a join.
Let me have a look.
There it is.
So for 3 7 8 George McDonald who lives in Marquette and Michigan is the owner of cuddles the dog.
So there we go.
That's how we use that foreign key to connect to this primary key nondisabled owner who is the primary
key because it identifies each Roseau each row here is an owner and every owner has a unique ID in this
database as if we run this table you'll notice that we only have 89 rows here which is interesting because
we have 100 pets.
So what does that mean.
Well that basically means that.
One of two things either some pets don't have owners which is highly unlikely because somebody has to
bring the pet to the veterinarian for them to get into the database.
So they had to be in on the first place.
So what the more likely scenario is that some owners have several pets and that's totally normal.
Sometimes people have several cats dogs or a dog and a cat or a parrot and we'll see that in action
soon.
So now we're going to proceed very fast.
And so what we want to do is want to connect these two tables so we want to see the information for
the pets like this and then we want to see their respective owners in the same rows in the same view.
Like as a continuation of the table so how do we create that.
Well it's pressure.
We're going to create a left join.
A left join because we want to see all of the pets.
We know that we definitely want everything in the Pets table.
Right.
And then we want to add things onto the right and that's why it's a left join basically we'll have pets
on the left will be our primary table and then we'll add rows in the right and the left join will guarantee
us that the table on the left will not lose any information.
You know even if there's no matching rows in that in the owner's table we'll still see all the pets.
All right.
So let's go ahead.
We're going to Silex star as always.
But the again say from pets I won't stop there will say a left join and then we say the name of the
second table owners and they need to specify how to join the tables because at this point Asgill knows
which tables are going to join but doesn't know what criteria you want to use for the join.
That's where we hear Wiegand say on.
And then you specify which field you want to join on and then you going say pets Daut.
Basically you'd say owner ID equals owner ID.
Right.
But if you try to run this line you will get an error because in this case even though we understand
this owner ID is from the pet stable this owner ID is from the owners table and still doesnt know that
it doesnt know what we are thinking.
Conry don't mind so we have to say pets Daut on Friday and then owners Daut owner and that will specify
from which table which field comes from.
If you run that youll get your first joint.
Congratulations.
This is our very first joint and here we've got our pets table on the left up on radio here and then
we got the second table for owners on the right.
Here it was joined and you can see it has been joined to match up with the correct the own the correct
owner correct.
Pat and here you can see cuddles of dog George McDonald as we discovered earlier.
So there we go that's a very first join us how we write it out and which you'll notice if I are on this
is that there's a total of 100 rows here right.
And if you think about it what does that mean.
Well that means that of course there would be hundreds because we did a left join.
So it definitely keeps these tables this one is on the left and it keeps all of the rows of the pets.
And if you scroll down if let's see if there's any pets that don't have an owner you can see that all
of these fields in the right are full.
There's no empty cells there's no walls.
Meaning that every single pet has an owner.
And what that implies is that they are indeed some owners that have several pets.
And so let's see if we can find one.
I think there might be one somewhere here.
So there we go.
So we see Elvia Warren who lives in Southfield Michigan.
She's got two pets she's got Scott the dog and Lilly the dog.
Two female dogs two and three years old.
And this person has two pets and if you scroll around and have a bit of a closer look you'll see that
they are more people that have several pets.
So that's how our left join works.
That's our very first example let's have a look at another example let's say let's make this a bit more
interesting.
Right so let's upgrade this.
All right let's say we want to we all don't want to Slick's star we want to select only certain fields
from a join.
We want to select only the name of the pet and the name of the owner and see how owners name their pets.
So what do we do here.
We would normally would say name right as in we want to select a name column from here and say name
here.
But again what do we get.
We get a situation where we've got two columns with the same name or in fact even if we just selected
one of them just one name would get an error for this because it says here column reference name is
ambiguous meaning that it is insufficient information for a skill to decide which column you want the
name from the table or the name call from the owner's name.
So that's why we have to do the same thing.
Pets Daut name Colma owners dog name and that way it will know where to get each comb from and there
we go.
We've got the name of the pet and the name of the dog or the name of the pet and the name of the owner.
So we've got Blackey and owner Robert rhumba Charles Simba.
Ed Keller Paul cuddles George and so on.
So there we go.
That's how we create and joins as you can see after this polished part is as we are used to except it
has the names of the tables and the dots at the beginning.
Then this part is sort of just from it has from left join and then on.
So this bit and then the rest of the same so you can add where clauses and so on and so we'll go into
a bit more depth into that further throughout the section.
But for now play around with that just make sure you're comfortable with performing your own lift joins
and selecting the columns that you want to select from those tables and I'll see you next time.
Until then happy analyzing.